(bright, uptempo music)
(whooshing)
(keyboard clacking)
(mouse clicking)
So, in this video,
we're going to look at arrays as a data structure.
So, the most important thing to understand
about arrays is how they're stored in memory.
And, essentially, they're stored
as one contiguous block in memory.
And what I mean by that is you don't have the items
or elements in an array scattered throughout memory.
All of the elements, items, whatever you want to call them,
in an array, they're all stored as one contiguous block.
So, let's say an array starts at memory address 100.
That's a bogus memory address.
You wouldn't have a memory address like that,
but to keep things simple, let's pretend
that we have an array that starts at memory address 100.
And let's say that array is 200 bytes long.
Well, then, what happens is, starting at memory address 100,
the following 200 bytes are the contents of the array.
So, the array is just one huge block
and that's why we have to specify
the length of the array when we create the array
because that tells the JVM how much memory
it has to allocate for that array.
And it's one reason why arrays can't be resized,
because, if they could be resized,
then there'd be no guarantee after that
that whatever, when we added extra space on,
that that extra space would be in
that same contiguous block of memory.
So, arrays have a static length
and when you create an array,
there's one huge block of memory allocated for that array.
So, the elements of an array are not
scattered all over the place in memory.
Now, the second important thing about arrays
is every element in the array occupies
the same amount of space in memory.
For example, when we created our int array,
every item that we put into that array will an integer,
and in Java, an integer is four bytes,
so every value in our int array
was occupying four bytes in memory.
You can't have an array element that occupies four bytes
and then the second array element occupies 12 bytes
and the third array element occupies 300 bytes.
That doesn't work.
Now, at this point, you might be thinking about objects
and thinking, well, wait a minute,
what if I create an array of strings?
I mean the strings in the array
could be of different lengths, so, you know, they're gonna
be taking up different amounts of memory.
What's important to understand when
you're working with objects,
not primitives like when you're working with ints,
but when you're working with objects,
what's stored in the variables is an object reference.
So, when you create an array of objects,
what's stored in the array elements
is a reference to those objects.
And object references are always the same size,
regardless of the type of object they're referring to.
So if you create an array of string
what you're actually storing in the array
is a bunch of object references to the string instances.
And those object references are all gonna be the same size.
And that's why you can have an object array
and store any type of object in there.
It's because the object references
to the different instances are always the same size.
So arrays occupy one contiguous block in memory
and every element in the array
occupies the same amount of space in memory.
So, because of that, we can easily calculate
the memory address of an array element based on its index.
So, if an array starts at memory address x
and the size of each element in the array is y,
then we can calculate the memory address of the ith element,
so array i, by using the following expression,
x plus i times y, and we're gonna look
at an example of this in couple of slides.
So you'll see an illustration of this.
So, basically, what that means is
if we know the index of an element in the array,
then the time or the number of steps
we have to do to retrieve the element will be the same,
no matter where it is in the array,
because all we have to do to get
the memory address of that element is x plus i times y,
and that works whether we want
the first element in the array
or the 5,000th element in the array
or the one millionth element in the array.
All we ever have to do to get really quickly to that element
is do that simple calculation to get the memory address.
And this is made possible because of the first two points,
because arrays are one large contiguous block in memory
and because every element in the array
occupies the same amount of space in memory.
So, let's have a look at this for the array we just created.
So, we created an array of length seven,
so the value indices are zero to six
and the values are 20, 35, minus 15,
seven, 55, one and minus 22.
Now, for this example, we're gonna pretend
the start address of the array is 12.
As I said, that's a bogus memory address.
You know, it doesn't matter what the number is.
And because these are integers,
the element size is four bytes.
So, if we wanted to get the element at array zero,
well that's equal to the start address of the array, right,
because the array starts here at 12
and so the first element of the array
is actually going to have the same address
as the beginning of the array.
So if we want the address of array zero, we get 12.
If we want the 35, we need to jump past the 20
and so, if we want array one, we're gonna start at 12
and then we're gonna add four bytes
because we know that the size
of each of these elements is four bytes,
and, so, if we want the second element in the array,
we start at the memory address, which is 12,
and we add four bytes, and now we're at
the start address for the 35.
So, that's 12 plus one times four equals 16
and if we go back to our calculation here,
that's the x plus i times y.
So, x is the 12, i is the index,
which in this case is one,
and y is the size of each element
in the array, which is four.
So that's how we're doing this calculation.
So, if we want minus 15, we've gotta jump over two elements,
so we're gonna start at 12
and this time we're gonna add
two times four to it to get 20.
So the 15 will start at 20.
If we want to get to the seven,
we've gotta jump over three elements to get to the seven,
so that's gonna be 12 plus three times four
and that'll give us 24 and so on.
And this is possible because the array
is one contiguous block in memory,
so all the elements are stored in one block in order
and also because every element
occupies the same space in memory.
If that wasn't true, if either of those two requirements
weren't true, we would not be able to use
this simple formula to quickly go
to an element in the array.
So, what this means is that, if we know
the index of an element in the array,
we can get to it really quickly,
and it doesn't matter where it is in the array.
I mean, if you look at array one versus array six,
we're doing the same calculation
and we're actually doing the calculation here as well.
I didn't show it, but this is actually
12 plus zero times four,
which is 12 plus zero, which is 12.
And now, maybe you can understand why
array indices are zero based,
because if they weren't zero based,
if they started at one, we'd have to subtract one here
because then we'd have 12 plus one times four,
that would be wrong 'cause then
we'd get 16 for the first one,
so we'd have to always subtract one
before we did the multiplication.
Starting the indices at zero means we don't have to do that.
So we can just substitute the array index in here.
'Cause, remember, this is zero times four.
I probably should have written that out, but I didn't.
So, one of the things that arrays are really good at doing
is retrieving elements if you know the index.
So, if we know the index of the element we want,
we can get to that element very quickly
regardless of where the element is in the array.
Okay, so and we understand how arrays
are stored under the covers
and we understand why, when we have an index of an array,
we can get to the element really, really quickly.
Doesn't matter where the element is in the array.
We do the same calculation.
So with that in mind, let's move on
and look the Big O values for array operations.
I'll see you in the next video.